---
layout: post
title: "kotlin: values, functions, currying, partial application and eta-reduction"
date: 2025-02-07 02:00:00 -0000
tag: haskell
---

In the [previous post](../../../2025/02/06/hs1.html) we talked about values, functions, currying, partial application and eta-reduction in haskell.
This post shows how the same can be done in kotlin, be it not as nice.

# values and functions

```kotlin
val a = 5
```

Here the symbol `a` is assigned with the value 5. 

```kotlin
val a = 2 + 3
```

Here the symbol `a` is assigned with the result of calculating 2 + 3, which also is 5.

```kotlin
fun sum(x: Int, y: Int) = x + y

val a = sum(2, 3)
```

Here a function `sum` is defined that takes two arguments and returns the sum of those two numbers.
The value `a` is assigned to the result of calling `sum` with arguments 2 and 3, which calculates 2 + 3, which is still 5.

# currying

```kotlin
fun addThree(x: Int) = sum(3, x)
```

Here we define a new function `addThree` that is defined as calling our earlier `sum` function with 3 and `x`.

Kotlin does not support partial application out of the box, so we need to rewrite our `sum` function.

```kotlin
fun curriedSum(x: Int) = { y: Int -> x + y }

val a = curriedSum(3)(2)
```

As you can see now partial application is possible for our new `curriedSum` function.

```kotlin
fun addThree(x: Int) = curriedSum(3)(x)

val a = addThree(2)
```

Here we have rewritten `addThree` using `curriedSum` in curried form. This means that `curriedSum` is first called with `3` as argument, and the result of that is a new
function that takes only one argument and we call that function with argument `x`. In general calling a function with many arguments can be seen as calling that function with the first argument, then the result of that with the second argument, etc.

# partial application

`curriedSum(3)` is called a partial application of `curriedSum` with `3`. The result of that partial application is a function that takes only one argument and returns that argument + 3.

# eta-reduction

If you think about it, `curriedSum(3)` is exactly what our `addThree` function is supposed to do. Because of this we can simplify the definition with a process that is called eta-reduction.

```kotlin
val addThree = curriedSum(3)
val a = addThree(2)
```

Here we define a new name `addThree` for the function `curriedSum(3)` which is the function which takes one argument and returns that argument incremented by 3. As you can see, `a` will still be 5. 

```kotlin
// sum = (+)
```

This is not possible in kotlin as `+` is not curried.


```kotlin
// addthree = (+ 3)
```

This is also not possible in kotlin, as `+` is still not curried.

# summary

It is definitely possible to use these concepts in kotlin, but it is not as nice as in [haskell](../../../2025/02/06/hs1.html).
