---
layout: post
title: "haskell: values, functions, currying, partial application and eta-reduction"
date: 2025-02-06 00:00:00 -0000
tag: haskell
---

# values and functions

```haskell
a = 5
```

Here the symbol `a` is assigned with the value 5. 

```haskell
a = 2 + 3
```

Here the symbol `a` is assigned with the result of calculating 2 + 2, which also is 5.

```haskell
sum x y = x + y
a = sum 2 3
```

Here the symbol `sum` is defined as a function that takes two arguments and returns the sum of those two numbers.
The value `a` is assigned to the result of calling `sum` with arguments 2 and 3, which calculates 2 + 3, which is still 5.

# currying

```haskell
addThree x = sum 3 x
```

Here we define a new function `addThree` that is defined as calling our earlier `sum` function with 3 and `x`.

```haskell
addThree x = (sum 3) x
```

Here we have rewritten addThree in curried form. This means that `sum` is first called with `3` as argument, and the result of that is a new
function that takes only one argument and we call that function with argument `x`. In general calling a function with many arguments can be seen as calling that function with the first argument, then the result of that with the second argument, etc.

Another way to think about it is to have the `sum` function rewritten like this, returning a function that only takes one argument and return a new function that takes another argument:

```haskell
sum x = (\y -> x + y)

a = sum 2 3
```

That `sum` function can still be called with two arguments, where the second argument is passed on to the new function returned by `sum`.


# partial application

`sum 3` is called a partial application of `sum` with `3`. The result of that partial application is a function that takes only one argument and returns that argument + 3.

# eta-reduction

If you think about it, `sum 3` is exactly what our `addThree` function is supposed to do. Because of this we can simplify the definition with a process that is called eta-reduction.

```haskell
addThree = sum 3
```

Here we define a new name `addThree` for the function `sum 3` which is the function which takes one argument and returns that argument incremented by 3.

```haskell
sum = (+)
```

In a simular way we can define our `sum` function from earlier just as being equal to the `+` operator. We have to add the () to make it infix.

```haskell
addthree = (+ 3)
```

Finally we can also define our `addThree` function directly based on `+`.

# summary

All of these concepts will start to make more sense when writing more complex programs.

We look at the same concepts in [python](../../../{{ page.next.url }}) in the [next post](../../../{{ page.next.url }}).

After that we look at the same concepts in [rust](../../../2025/02/07/ru1.html).