---
layout: post
title: "rust: values, functions, currying, partial application and eta-reduction"
date: 2025-02-07 01:00:00 -0000
tag: haskell
---

<!-- In the [previous post](../../../2025/02/06/hs1.html) we talked about values, functions, currying, partial application and eta-reduction in haskell. -->
This post shows how the same can be done in rust, be it not as nice.

# values and functions

```rust
let a = 5;
```

Here the symbol `a` is assigned with the value 5. 

```rust
let a = 2 + 3;
```

Here the symbol `a` is assigned with the result of calculating 2 + 2, which also is 5.

```rust
fn sum(x: i32, y: i32) -> i32 {
    x + y
}

let a = sum(2, 3);
```

Here a function `sum` is defined that takes two arguments and returns the sum of those two numbers.
The value `a` is assigned to the result of calling `sum` with arguments 2 and 3, which calculates 2 + 3, which is still 5.

# currying

```rust
fn add_three(x: i32) -> i32 { 
    sum(3, x)
}
```

Here we define a new function `add_three` that is defined as calling our earlier `sum` function with 3 and `x`.

Rust does not support partial application out of the box, so we need to rewrite our `sum` function.

```rust
fn curried_sum(x: i32) -> impl Fn(i32) -> i32 {
    move |y: i32| -> i32 {
       x + y
   }
}

let a = curried_sum(3)(2);
```

As you can see now partial application is possible for our new `curried_sum` function.

```rust
fn add_three(x: i32) -> i32 { 
    curried_sum(3)(x)
}

let a = add_three(2);
```

Here we have rewritten `add_three` using `curried_sum` in curried form. This means that `curried_sum` is first called with `3` as argument, and the result of that is a new
function that takes only one argument and we call that function with argument `x`. In general calling a function with many arguments can be seen as calling that function with the first argument, then the result of that with the second argument, etc.

# partial application

`curried_sum(3)` is called a partial application of `curried_sum` with `3`. The result of that partial application is a function that takes only one argument and returns that argument + 3.

# eta-reduction

If you think about it, `curried_sum(3)` is exactly what our `add_three` function is supposed to do. Because of this we can simplify the definition with a process that is called eta-reduction.

```rust
let add_three = curried_sum(3);
let a = add_three(2);
```

Here we define a new name `add_three` for the function `curried_sum(3)` which is the function which takes one argument and returns that argument incremented by 3. As you can see, `a` will still be 5. 

```rust
// sum = (+)
```

This is not possible in rust as `+` is not curried.


```rust
// addthree = (+ 3)
```

This is also not possible in rust, as `+` is still not curried.

# summary

It is definitely possible to use these concepts in rust, but it is not as nice as in [haskell](../../../2025/02/06/hs1.html).
