---
layout: post
title: "python: values, functions, currying, partial application and eta-reduction"
date: 2025-02-07 00:00:00 -0000
tag: haskell
---

In the [previous post](../../../{{ page.previous.url }}) we talked about values, functions, currying, partial application and eta-reduction in haskell.
This post shows how the same can be done in python, be it not as nice.

# values and functions

```python
a = 5
```

Here the symbol `a` is assigned with the value 5. 

```python
a = 2 + 3
```

Here the symbol `a` is assigned with the result of calculating 2 + 2, which also is 5.

```python
def sum(x,y):
    return x + y

a = sum(2,3)
```

Here a function `sum` is defined that takes two arguments and returns the sum of those two numbers.
The value a is assigned to the result of calling `sum` with arguments 2 and 3, which calculates 2 + 3, which is still 5.

# currying

```python
def addThree(x): 
    return sum(3,x)
```

Here we define a new function `addThree` that is defined as calling our earlier `sum` function with 3 and `x`.

Python does not support partial application out of the box, so we need to rewrite our `sum` function.

```python
def curriedSum(a):
    return lambda b: a + b 

a = curriedSum(3)(2)
```

As you can see now partial application is possible for our new `curriedSum` function.

```python
def addThree(x): 
    return curriedSum(3)(x)

a = addThree(2)
```

Here we have rewritten `addThree` using `curriedSum` in curried form. This means that `sum` is first called with `3` as argument, and the result of that is a new
function that takes only one argument and we call that function with argument `x`. In general calling a function with many arguments can be seen as calling that function with the first argument, then the result of that with the second argument, etc.

# partial application

`curriedSum(3)` is called a partial application of `curriedSum` with `3`. The result of that partial application is a function that takes only one argument and returns that argument + 3.

# eta-reduction

If you think about it, `curriedSum(3)` is exactly what our `addThree` function is supposed to do. Because of this we can simplify the definition with a process that is called eta-reduction.

```python
addThree = curriedSum(3)

a = addThree(2)
```

Here we define a new name `addThree` for the function `curriedSum(3)` which is the function which takes one argument and returns that argument incremented by 3. As you can see, `a` will still be 5. 

```python
# sum = (+)
```

This is not possible in python as `+` is not curried.


```haskell
# addthree = (+ 3)
```

This is also not possible in python, as `+` is still not curried.

# summary

It is definitely possible to use these concepts in python, but it is not as nice as in [haskell](../../../{{ page.previous.url }}).
